# Things to bear in mind when developing an internet-based intervention

This chapter is for people who are new to creating Internet-delivered
interventions. It is beyond the scope of these help files to provide a
detailed guide on how to do this, but we have listed below some key tips
and issues to consider.

Our [useful resources and links
page](useful-resources-and-links)
includes helpful web links for finding out more about important things
to bear in mind when developing online interventions.

# Tips for designing a web-based intervention

Intervention designers often base their web-based interventions on
interventions that have proved successful in other formats (e.g.
face-to-face or printed delivery). But the way in which web-based
interventions need to be presented is quite different, for several
reasons:

1\. **Internet users are demanding** – they are impatient and are used
to good-looking, entertaining, easy to use websites. People will not
just sit and read pages of text on the computer – to get the information
across you will need to condense it, using plenty of bullet points,
boxes and optional links to further information. A fantastic guide to
creating a website that it is engaging and easy to follow is Steve
Krug’s book Don’t make me think!

It helps to break up the text with pictures and you can also use more
engaging formats such as quizzes, games and stories. Unless you are very
creative it is a good idea to get input from graphics designers,
illustrators, or multi-media designers – the most professional
interventions have even employed film directors for their videos!

2\. **Internet users like being in control**. You may think your
end-users should log on, complete 6 long questionnaires and then follow
a set course of sessions for 8 weeks – but they are used to browsing the
web anonymously to choose what they will look at whenever they want to.
Web users are typically unwilling to log on or give their email address
or other details, and like to be able to click on what they want to do
and see. Highly motivated and committed end-users (e.g. people who have
signed up for an internet course of cognitive-behavioural therapy for a
serious problem) are more willing to log on and follow a recommended
programme.

3\. **Computers can’t read**. If you want your intervention to give
advice or feedback based on what end-users enter then you need to
convert what they enter into a numerical or categorical variable.

# Collecting numerical/categorical information from end-users

-   If you ask the user to type in a description of what physical
    activity they did today or what their activity goal is then you
    cannot give feedback based on this text (though you can get the
    computer to record it and present it later – perhaps if you want to
    remind people what goal they set).

<!-- -->

-   If you ask the user to select an amount of physical activity they
    want to achieve as their goal from a drop-down list of 5 options,
    and then type the number of minutes they did light, moderate or
    intensive activity, you can use the software to give feedback about
    whether they are meeting their goal.

# Learning from other interventions designers’ experience

There is no need to try to reinvent the wheel – you can learn from
others who have created website interventions. It really helps to have
someone on the team (or at least providing advice) who has done it
before.

You can get good ideas for the format and components from looking at
other web-based interventions. The demos and interventions on the
LifeGuide Community website can also show you how to create similar
components using LifeGuide.

# Learning from your target end-users

You will very quickly learn that *no-one* can provide you with better
advice about website development than your target end-users! Website
designers may advise you about the best look and structure for your site
and topic experts may insist on particular ways of delivering the
intervention – but it is vital to find out how real end-users feel as
early as you can, as this is often quite different from what was
expected.

Input from end-users can be obtained by:

-   including one or two members of your target population on the design
    team
-   holding focus groups at key points in the development
-   creating a panel of end-users who are happy to give you feedback on
    repeated occasions (it may help to ask them to try out the
    intervention at home and keep a diary of it)
-   using the ‘think aloud’ method to observe people actually using the
    intervention, and get their immediate reactions. Include all the
    types of end-users you want to reach, e.g. young and old,
    experienced and novice computer users, people with disabilities etc.

An advantage of using LifeGuide is that you can keep testing and
modifying it as you develop it based on how end-users react. You can
also collect details of how the end-user navigates through the site and
what pages they use most often using the data collected in the
intervention manager of LifeGuide.

# Planning your intervention development

## Planning for different types of advice

You will need to create a different version of advice and feedback for
each sub-group created by tailoring (i.e. personalising advice based on
the user’s inputted characteristics).

-   If you just tailor by gender and whether the user is young or old
    then you will only need to create 4 versions of the advice (2X2,
    e.g. for young women, older women, young men and older men).

<!-- -->

-   If you also want to also give different advice depending on whether
    they are improving or deteriorating, whether they are low or high in
    motivation, and whether they are low or high in confidence, you need
    to produce 32 different combinations of advice (2X2X2X2X2).

## Planning your time

The length of time it will take to develop your intervention obviously
depends on the complexity and quality you need to achieve, and whether
you have already developed your materials. For example, making high
quality illustrative videos can be expensive and time-consuming. So it
pays to think carefully about whether features that you would like to
see in the intervention will really affect engagement and outcomes for
your end-users.

Most interventions have four stages: planning (working out how many
sessions you will have and what they will contain, emails you will send,
and so on), writing content, building the intervention (creating pages
and writing logic) and testing the intervention.

Assuming that the basic intervention materials have already been
developed (for example for face-to-face delivery), then as a rough guide
to the time taken for one person working full-time to create the
webpages and logic using LifeGuide:

-   a short twenty-item questionnaire with basic logic commands may only
    take a few days
-   a detailed session for a CBT intervention with 20 pages linked by
    complex logic commands may take a month (double this for the first
    one you create, but by the time you are doing the last one in a
    series it may take less than 3 weeks)

On top of this, you will also need to allow time for:

-   **preparation** – e.g. bringing in a designer for the look and feel
    of the site, consulting users about what components are needed

<!-- -->

-   **creating the logic for running an automated evaluation** – it can
    take two months to set up complex procedures for screening,
    randomisation, reminder follow-up emails etc.

<!-- -->

-   **testing** the logic for every possible end-user of a site (e.g.
    does an 80 year old male who has recently been in hospital go to the
    advice that matches his situation) and testing that the site works
    as it is supposed to (e.g. do links and buttons take you to the
    pages that they are meant to).

<!-- -->

-   **more testing** – we cannot stress enough the importance of
    testing. It would be really disheartening if you finished developing
    your intervention and then found that it didn’t do what you wanted
    it to do!! So, before you put the same piece of logic into every
    session of your intervention, you might like to test it is doing
    what you expect it to do the first time you add something new.
    Regularly previewing your intervention is also highly recommended.

<!-- -->

-   **qualitative piloting** with a range of end-users throughout
    (including gaining ethics approval for pilot studies)

## Prioritising your intervention features

Since it is difficult to be sure how long development will take (but it
always takes longer than you expect!) it is useful to prioritise the
functions you wish to include in your intervention. You can use the
MoSCoW approach to identify functions you want:

-   ‘**M**ust have’ (essential)
-   ‘**S**hould have’ (important, but can be worked around if necessary)
-   ‘**C**ould have’ (nice to have but not critical)
-   ‘**W**ould like’ (for future projects).

# Creating a trustworthy and accessible intervention

It is your responsibility to create an intervention that is – and is
seen as - accessible and trustworthy. End-users like to know who created
a website, what your credentials are, how you can be contacted, what
evidence it is based on and when it was updated. The [Health on the Net
Foundation](http://www.hon.ch/) provides guidelines for good practice
and will inspect and certificate health-related websites on request.

It is difficult to make a website equally accessible to everyone (for
example, different formats increase accessibility for people with
different types of impairment), so it is important to research what
features will make it easiest for your target population.

If you are going to evaluate your intervention, then you will need to
obtain ethics approval in the usual way. You should, of course, gain
prior informed consent to collect and analyse any data from end-users.
There is a growing field of literature that you can consult on ethical
issues relating to web-based research. You also need to bear in mind
legal issues, especially if you are giving advice that could potentially
cause harm.

# Security

Researchers are naturally concerned about security, especially when it
comes to the data they collect during a trial. All LifeGuide servers are
secure servers (https), which are hosted by the University of
Southampton and behind the firewall of the department of Electronics and
Computer Science. We have followed the standard techniques for Web
system security; for instance researchers' passwords are not stored in
plain text in the database and LifeGuide uses the security standards
implemented by Java's Spring Security.

While we have taken all reasonable security measures in the design of
LifeGuide, it is important to note that the biggest cause of security
breaches is through weak passwords or sharing of passwords. It is
important to have a standard operating procedure in place that ensures
that end-users create strong passwords and don't exchange them with each
other.

# References

Krug, S. *Don’t make me think! A common sense approach to web
usability*. New Riders Publishing, USA, 2006.
